Abstract
Aims

Previous work has shown that rifampicin, a potent inducer of several cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes and transporters, decreased the plasma concentrations of simvastatin acid by more than 90%. This study was conducted to investigate the effect of rifampicin on the pharmacokinetics of pravastatin.

Methods

In a randomised, cross-over two-phase study with a washout of 4 weeks, 10 healthy volunteers received a 5-day pretreatment with rifampicin (600 mg daily) or placebo. On day 6, a single 40 mg dose of pravastatin was administered orally. Plasma concentrations of pravastatin were measured up to 12 h by a sensitive LC-MS-MS method.

Results

During the rifampicin phase, the mean total area under the plasma concentration-time curve of pravastatin [AUC(0–∞)] was 69% (range 24–220%) of the corresponding value during the placebo phase (P < 0.05, 95% confidence interval for the difference −51.9–−0.4 ng ml−1·h). In five of the 10 subjects the AUC(0–∞) of pravastatin during the rifampicin phase was 50% or less of that during the placebo phase. Rifampicin had no significant effect on the peak concentration, elimination half-life or renal clearance of pravastatin.

Conclusions

Rifampicin caused a statistically significant decrease in the plasma concentration of pravastatin given as a single oral dose to healthy subjects. However, the effect of rifampicin varied greatly between subjects. The mean rifampicin-induced decrease in pravastatin concentration was considerably smaller than that observed previously for simvastatin.

Keywords: interaction, pravastatin, rifampicin
Go to:
Introduction
Rifampicin is a potent inducer of several cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes both in the intestinal wall and the liver [1–3]. Rifampicin also induces the expression of some drug transporters, for example the efflux transporters P-glycoprotein [4] and canalicular multispecific organic anion transporter (cMOAT, or MRP2) [5]. Induction of CYP enzymes and drug transporters by rifampicin is mediated by the activation of the nuclear pregnane X receptor (PXR) [6, 7]. Organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP) family members OATP2 (OATP-C or LST-1) and OATP8 (LST-2) can mediate the uptake of rifampicin into liver cells, and thus facilitate rifampicin mediated PXR activation [8]. Recently we showed that rifampicin decreases the total area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) and peak concentration (Cmax) of the HMG-CoA inhibitor simvastatin and its acid metabolite to about one tenth of control values [9].

Unlike simvastatin, the metabolism of pravastatin is not significantly mediated by CYP enzymes [10–12]. However, pravastatin is a substrate of MRP2 and the uptake transporter OATP2 [13–15]. Recent studies have illustrated differences in the interaction potential of the different statin drugs. Thus, itraconazole increased the AUC of simvastatin acid at least tenfold but had no significant effect on that of pravastatin [16]. Furthermore, combination therapy with the HIV protease inhibitors ritonavir and saquinavir increased the median AUC(0–24) of simvastatin 30-fold, but decreased that of pravastatin by 50% [17]. Pravastatin is a substrate of both influx and efflux transporters, and although significant interactions mediated by induction of pravastatin metabolism are not likely, the in vivo effects of induction of transporters are largely unknown. Thus, the extent of any interaction between rifampicin and pravastatin cannot be inferred from previous work. The aim of this study was to examine the possible effect of rifampicin on the pharmacokinetics of pravastatin in healthy volunteers, using an identical study design as in the previous study to allow comparison of the interaction potentials of simvastatin and pravastatin [9].

Go to:
Methods
Subjects

Ten healthy nonsmoking volunteers (age range, 19–25 years; weight range, 52–103 kg) participated in the study (Table 1) after giving their written informed consent. The subjects were ascertained to be healthy by a medical history, a physical examination, and routine blood chemistry tests before they entered the study. None of the subjects used oral contraceptives or other continuous medications. The sample size was chosen so that a possible clinically significant pharmacokinetic drug interaction can be verified statistically without the use of an unnecessarily large group of healthy subjects. The statistical power was estimated to be sufficient to detect a 50% change in the AUC of pravastatin with a power of 80% (alpha-level 5%).

Table 1
Table 1
Characteristics of the subjects
Study design

The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee for Studies in Healthy Subjects, Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa, and the Finnish National Agency for Medicines. A randomized, placebo-controlled, cross-over study design with 2 phases was used. The wash-out period between the phases was 4 weeks. Subjects were given either 600 mg rifampicin (Rifarm, Pharmacal, Helsinki, Finland) or matched placebo orally once daily at 4 p.m. for 5 days. On day 6, pravastatin (a single Pravachol 40 mg tablet, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, NY) was administered orally with 150 ml water at 9 AM, that is 17 h after the last dose of rifampicin. The subjects had fasted overnight, and a standard meal was served 3 and 7 h after the administration of pravastatin. Alcohol or strenuous exercise was not allowed for two days and subjects didn't ingest grapefruit juice or other drugs for two weeks before test days. The study design was otherwise identical to our previous rifampicin-simvastatin study [9].

Blood and urine sampling

Blood samples (10 ml each) were drawn from a cannulated forearm vein prior to administration of pravastatin and 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 h later, and were collected in tubes containing ethylenediaminetetra-acetic acid (EDTA). Plasma was separated within 30 min and stored at −70 °C until analysis. Urine was collected cumulatively from 0–12 h after the administration of pravastatin.

Determination of pravastatin

The concentrations of pravastatin in plasma and urine were measured by liquid chromatography-ionspray tandem mass spectrometry with use of the PE SCIEX API 3000 LC/MS/MS system (Sciex Division of MDS Inc, Toronto, Canada) as described previously [18]. The ion transition monitored was m/z 442 to m/z 269, and the limit of quantification was 0.25 ng ml−1. The day-to-day coefficients of variation (CV) were 9.0% at 1 ng ml−1, 2.6% at 10 ng ml−1 and 3.3% at 100 ng ml−1 (n = 7) replicates.

Pharmacokinetic analysis

Cmax and tmax were taken directly from the original data. The terminal log-linear phase of the plasma concentration-time curve was identified visually for each curve. The elimination rate constant (ke) was determined by a linear regression analysis using the last 3–8 points on the plot of the natural logarithm of the plasma concentration-time curve. The t1/2 was calculated from the equation t1/2 = ln2/ke. AUC values were calculated by the linear trapezoidal rule for the rising phase and the log-linear trapezoidal rule for the descending phase, with extrapolation to infinity, when appropriate, by dividing the last measured concentration by ke. The renal clearance (CLrenal 0−12 h) of pravastatin was calculated from CLrenal 0–12 h = Ae/AUC(0–12), where Ae is the amount of pravastatin excreted into urine within 12 h.

Statistical analysis

Results are expressed as mean values (± s.d.) in text and tables and, for clarity, as mean values (± s.e.mean) in the figures. 95% confidence intervals were calculated on the mean differences between the placebo and rifampicin phases for AUC(0–∞), Cmax and t1/2. Statistical comparisons of the pharmacokinetic variables (except tmax) were carried out by the Student t-test for paired values (two-tailed), and the Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used for analysis of tmax. Logarithmic transformation of Cmax and AUC values was done before statistical analysis. The Mann–Whitney U-test was used to compare the effect of rifampicin on the AUC(0–∞) of pravastatin and simvastatin acid [9]. The analysis was performed with Systat for Windows, V6.0.1 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Ill). The level of statistical significance was P <0.05.

Go to:
Results
During the rifampicin phase, the mean AUC(0–∞) of pravastatin was 69% (range 24–220%, P <0.05) of the corresponding value during the placebo phase (Figure 1, Table 2). However, there were large interindividual differences in the effect of rifampicin. Thus, the AUC(0–∞) of pravastatin decreased in 7 and increased in 3 of the 10 subjects. This effect was not related to the AUC of pravastatin during the placebo phase or to the gender of the subjects (Figure 2). Rifampicin tended to decrease the Cmax of pravastatin, on average by 21%, but the difference did not reach statistical significance (P = 0.13). Rifampicin had no statistically significant effect on the tmax (P = 0.33) or t1/2 (P = 0.75) of pravastatin (Table 2). The renal clearance and the cumulative excretion of pravastatin into the urine were largely unaffected by rifampicin (P = 0.14 and P = 0.35, respectively).

Table 2
Table 2
The pharmacokinetic variables of pravastatin in 10 healthy subjects after the ingestion of 40 mg pravastatin following treatment with 600 mg rifampicin or placebo twice daily for 5 days
Figure 1
Figure 1
Plasma concentrations (mean ± s.e.mean) of pravastatin in 10 healthy subjects after administration of 40 mg pravastatin following pretreatment with 600 mg rifampicin (•) or placebo (○) once daily for five days.
Figure 2
Figure 2
Individual total area under the concentration-time curve (AUCtot), peak plasma concentration (Cmax), renal clearance (CLrenal) and elimination half-life (T1/2) values of pravastatin in 10 healthy subjects after ingestion of 40 mg pravastatin following ...
The mean effect of rifampicin on the AUC of pravastatin in the present study was considerably smaller and more variable than that on the AUC of simvastatin acid in our previous study using an identical protocol (Figure 3) [9]. The difference in the effect of rifampicin on the AUC(0–∞) of pravastatin compared to simvastatin acid was statistically significant (P < 0.001).

Figure 3
Figure 3
Effect of an identical pretreatment with 600 mg rifampicin once daily for five days on the areas under the plasma concentration-time curve [AUC(0–∞)] of simvastatin acid and pravastatin as percent of control values. The simvastatin acid ...
Go to:
Discussion
In this study the plasma concentrations of pravastatin were moderately decreased by pretreatment with rifampicin. The mean AUC(0–∞) of pravastatin was decreased by 31%, but there was considerable interindividual variation. In five of the 10 subjects the AUC(0–∞) of pravastatin during the rifampicin phase was 50% or less of that during the placebo phase. However, in three subjects the plasma concentrations of pravastatin increased during the rifampicin phase. The other pharmacokinetic variables studied were not altered to a statistically significant degree. Although the effect of rifampicin was statistically significant, the possibility of chance finding cannot be excluded. In any case, carry over or period effects did not explain the observations.

The effect of rifampicin on pravastatin pharmacokinetics is not likely to be caused by induction of CYP3A4 or P-glycoprotein, because pravastatin is not a substrate of P-glycoprotein, CYP3A4 or other CYP enzymes [10, 11, 19–21]. However, pravastatin is a substrate of canalicular multispecific organic anion transporter (cMOAT or MRP2) [13], expressed in the kidney, liver and intestine [22]. This efflux transporter can affect the absorption, tissue uptake and elimination of substrate drugs. Rifampicin is known to induce duodenal MRP2 mRNA and MRP2 protein [5], which may result in a decreased exposure to substrates of this transporter. Induction of canalicular MRP2 by rifampicin might also decrease systemic pravastatin absorption by enhancing first-pass biliary excretion. Therefore, it is possible that the observed rifampicin–pravastatin interaction is a consequence of an effect of rifampicin on MRP2 or other transporting proteins. Fromm et al. [5] observed that rifampicin induced duodenal MRP2 protein in only 10 out of the 16 subjects [5], which is in line with our results that rifampicin only decreased pravastatin AUC in 7 out of 10 subjects (Figure 2). There are several allelic variants of OATP2 (OATP-C), an uptake transporter expressed exclusively in the liver sinusoidal membrane, which decrease cellular rifampicin retention and thus could cause interindividual variability in the activation of PXR receptors and consequent induction [8]. An explanation for the increase in pravastatin concentrations in some subjects might be the inhibition of OATP2-mediated uptake of pravastatin into hepatocytes by rifampicin [8]. However, it is likely that the concentrations of rifampicin in the liver were very low at the time of pravastatin administration, because the last dose of rifampicin was administered 17 h earlier. Accordingly, it is also possible that the increase in pravastatin concentrations in some subjects was the result of the inherent variability of pravastatin AUC within an individual.

Glucuronidation appears to be one of the predominant pathways of pravastatin metabolism [12], and rifampicin is also known to induce the phase II enzymes, such as UDP-glucuronosyltransferases [24–26]. Nevertheless, because the renal clearance and elimination half-life of pravastatin were largely unaffected by rifampicin, it is reasonable to assume that the interaction occurred primarily during the absorption rather than the elimination phase.

Recently, we showed that using an identical protocol, pretreatment with rifampicin greatly decreased the AUC(0–∞) of simvastatin and simvastatin acid in all of the 10 subjects studied [9]. This effect was much greater than that on the pharmacokinetics of pravastatin observed in the present study. In other work, itraconazole was found to increase the AUC(0–∞) and Cmax of simvastatin acid at least tenfold (P < 0.001), whereas the effect on the AUC(0–∞) and Cmax of pravastatin was not statistically significant [16]. Furthermore, a 14-day pretreatment with St John's wort, an inducer of CYP3A4 and P-glycoprotein, decreased the mean AUC(0–24) of simvastatin acid by 52%, but had no effect on that of pravastatin [27]. These results are in agreement with the present findings and indicate that pravastatin is less susceptible to pharmacokinetic interactions than simvastatin.

Rifampicin decreases the total AUC of fluvastatin, a CYP2C9 substrate [28], by about 50% [23]. Preliminary data also indicate that rifampicin decreases the AUC of atorvastatin by a mean of 78% compared to placebo [30]. Because the pharmacokinetic properties of the CYP3A4 substrate lovastatin closely resemble those of simvastatin [31, 32], it is likely that rifampicin will induce the metabolism of lovastatin and lovastatin acid as well. Of the statins studied so far, pravastatin appears to be least susceptible to the potent inducing effects of rifampicin, and therefore seems most suited for use in combination with inducers of CYP enzymes or P-glycoprotein. However, the decrease in pravastatin exposure by rifampicin might be clinically significant in some individuals, and the dose of pravastatin might need adjustment.

In conclusion, rifampicin had a relatively small but highly variable effect on the pharmacokinetics of pravastatin. The dose of pravastatin might need adjustment in some individuals if long-term treatment with rifampicin is needed.

Go to:
Acknowledgments
We thank Mr Jouko Laitila, Mrs Kerttu Mårtensson, Mrs Eija Mäkinen-Pulli, and Mrs Lisbet Partanen for technical assistance.